MATHEMATICS  FOR
MACHINE LEAR NING
Marc Peter Deisenroth
A. Aldo Faisal
Cheng Soon On g
MATHEMATICS FOR MACHINE LEARNING DEISENROTH ET AL.
The fundamental mathematical tools needed to understand machine
learning include linear algebra, analytic geometry, matrix decompositions, vector calculus, optimization, probability and statistics. These topics are traditionally taught in disparate courses, making it hard for data science or computer science students, or professionals, to efﬁ  ciently learn the mathematics. This self-contained textbook bridges the gap between mathematical and machine learning texts, introducing the mathematical concepts with a minimum of prerequisites. It uses these concepts to derive four central machine learning methods: linear regression, principal component analysis, Gaussian mixture models and support vector machines. For students and others with a mathematical background, these derivations provide a starting point to machine learning texts. For those learning the mathematics for the ﬁ  rst time, the methods help build intuition and practical experience with applying mathematical concepts. Every chapter includes worked examples and exercises to test understanding. Programming tutorials are offered on the book’s web site.
MARC PETER DEISENROTH  is Senior Lecturer in Statistical Machine
Learning at the Department of Computing, Împerial College London.
A. ALDO FAISAL  leads the Brain & Behaviour Lab at Imperial College
London, where he is also Reader in Neurotechnology at the Department of Bioengineering and the Department of Computing. CHENG SOON ONG  is Principal Research Scientist at the Machine Learning
Research Group, Data61, CSIRO. He is also Adjunct Associate Professor at Australian National University. Cover image courtesy of Daniel Bosma / Moment / Getty Images
Cover design by Holly Johnson
Deisenrith et al. 9781108455145 Cover. C M Y K
Contents
Foreword 1
Part I Mathematical Foundations 9
1 Introduction and Motivation 11
1.1 Finding Words for Intuitions 12
1.2 Two Ways to Read This Book 13
1.3 Exercises and Feedback 16
2 Linear Algebra 17
2.1 Systems of Linear Equations 19
2.2 Matrices 22
2.3 Solving Systems of Linear Equations 27
2.4 Vector Spaces 35
2.5 Linear Independence 40
2.6 Basis and Rank 44
2.7 Linear Mappings 48
2.8 Afﬁne Spaces 61
2.9 Further Reading 63
Exercises 64
3 Analytic Geometry 70
3.1 Norms 71
3.2 Inner Products 72
3.3 Lengths and Distances 75
3.4 Angles and Orthogonality 76
3.5 Orthonormal Basis 78
3.6 Orthogonal Complement 79
3.7 Inner Product of Functions 80
3.8 Orthogonal Projections 81
3.9 Rotations 91
3.10 Further Reading 94
Exercises 96
4 Matrix Decompositions 98
4.1 Determinant and Trace 99
i
This material will be published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learn-
ingby Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong. This pre-publication version is
free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale or use in deriva-
tive works. cby M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2019. https://mml-book.com . ii Contents
4.2 Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors 105
4.3 Cholesky Decomposition 114
4.4 Eigendecomposition and Diagonalization 115
4.5 Singular Value Decomposition 119
4.6 Matrix Approximation 129
4.7 Matrix Phylogeny 134
4.8 Further Reading 135
Exercises 137
5 Vector Calculus 139
5.1 Differentiation of Univariate Functions 141
5.2 Partial Differentiation and Gradients 146
5.3 Gradients of Vector-Valued Functions 149
5.4 Gradients of Matrices 155
5.5 Useful Identities for Computing Gradients 158
5.6 Backpropagation and Automatic Differentiation 159
5.7 Higher-Order Derivatives 164
5.8 Linearization and Multivariate Taylor Series 165
5.9 Further Reading 170
Exercises 170
6 Probability and Distributions 172
6.1 Construction of a Probability Space 172
6.2 Discrete and Continuous Probabilities 178
6.3 Sum Rule, Product Rule, and Bayes’ Theorem 183
6.4 Summary Statistics and Independence 186
6.5 Gaussian Distribution 197
6.6 Conjugacy and the Exponential Family 205
6.7 Change of Variables/Inverse Transform 214
6.8 Further Reading 221
Exercises 222
7 Continuous Optimization 225
7.1 Optimization Using Gradient Descent 227
7.2 Constrained Optimization and Lagrange Multipliers 233
7.3 Convex Optimization 236
7.4 Further Reading 246
Exercises 247
Part II Central Machine Learning Problems 249
8 When Models Meet Data 251
8.1 Data, Models, and Learning 251
8.2 Empirical Risk Minimization 258
8.3 Parameter Estimation 265
8.4 Probabilistic Modeling and Inference 272
8.5 Directed Graphical Models 278
Draft (2019-10-27) of “Mathematics for Machine Learning”. Feedback: https://mml-book.com .
Contents iii
8.6 Model Selection 283
9 Linear Regression 289
9.1 Problem Formulation 291
9.2 Parameter Estimation 292
9.3 Bayesian Linear Regression 303
9.4 Maximum Likelihood as Orthogonal Projection 313
9.5 Further Reading 315
10 Dimensionality Reduction with Principal Component Analysis 317
10.1 Problem Setting 318
10.2 Maximum Variance Perspective 320
10.3 Projection Perspective 325
10.4 Eigenvector Computation and Low-Rank Approximations 333
10.5 PCA in High Dimensions 335
10.6 Key Steps of PCA in Practice 336
10.7 Latent Variable Perspective 339
10.8 Further Reading 343
11 Density Estimation with Gaussian Mixture Models 348
11.1 Gaussian Mixture Model 349
11.2 Parameter Learning via Maximum Likelihood 350
11.3 EM Algorithm 360
11.4 Latent-Variable Perspective 363
11.5 Further Reading 368
12 Classiﬁcation with Support Vector Machines 370
12.1 Separating Hyperplanes 372
12.2 Primal Support Vector Machine 374
12.3 Dual Support Vector Machine 383
12.4 Kernels 388
12.5 Numerical Solution 390
12.6 Further Reading 392
References 395
Index 407
c2019 M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, C. S. Ong. To be published by Cambridge University Press. Foreword
Machine learning is the latest in a long line of attempts to distill human
knowledge and reasoning into a form that is suitable for constructing ma-
chines and engineering automated systems. As machine learning becomes
more ubiquitous and its software packages become easier to use, it is nat-
ural and desirable that the low-level technical details are abstracted away
and hidden from the practitioner. However, this brings with it the danger
that a practitioner becomes unaware of the design decisions and, hence,
the limits of machine learning algorithms. The enthusiastic practitioner who is interested to learn more about the
magic behind successful machine learning algorithms currently faces a
daunting set of pre-requisite knowledge:
Programming languages and data analysis tools
Large-scale computation and the associated frameworks
Mathematics and statistics and how machine learning builds on it
At universities, introductory courses on machine learning tend to spend
early parts of the course covering some of these pre-requisites. For histori-
cal reasons, courses in machine learning tend to be taught in the computer
science department, where students are often trained in the ﬁrst two areas
of knowledge, but not so much in mathematics and statistics. Current machine learning textbooks primarily focus on machine learn-
ing algorithms and methodologies and assume that the reader is com-
petent in mathematics and statistics. Therefore, these books only spend
one or two chapters of background mathematics, either at the beginning
of the book or as appendices. We have found many people who want to
delve into the foundations of basic machine learning methods who strug-
gle with the mathematical knowledge required to read a machine learning
textbook. Having taught undergraduate and graduate courses at universi-
ties, we ﬁnd that the gap between high school mathematics and the math-
ematics level required to read a standard machine learning textbook is too
big for many people. This book brings the mathematical foundations of basic machine learn-
ing concepts to the fore and collects the information in a single place so
that this skills gap is narrowed or even closed. 1
This material will be published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learn-
ingby Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong. This pre-publication version is
free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale or use in deriva-
tive works. cby M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2019. https://mml-book.com . 2 Foreword
Why Another Book on Machine Learning? Machine learning builds upon the language of mathematics to express
concepts that seem intuitively obvious but that are surprisingly difﬁcult
to formalize.
Once formalized properly, we can gain insights into the task
we want to solve. One common complaint of students of mathematics
around the globe is that the topics covered seem to have little relevance
to practical problems. We believe that machine learning is an obvious and
direct motivation for people to learn mathematics. This book is intended to be a guidebook to the vast mathematical lit-
erature that forms the foundations of modern machine learning. We mo- “Math is linked in
the popular mind
with phobia and
anxiety. You’d think
we’re discussing
spiders.” (Strogatz,
2014, page 281)tivate the need for mathematical concepts by directly pointing out their
usefulness in the context of fundamental machine learning problems. In
the interest of keeping the book short, many details and more advanced
concepts have been left out. Equipped with the basic concepts presented
here, and how they ﬁt into the larger context of machine learning, the
reader can ﬁnd numerous resources for further study, which we provide at
the end of the respective chapters. For readers with a mathematical back-
ground, this book provides a brief but precisely stated glimpse of machine
learning. In contrast to other books that focus on methods and models
of machine learning (MacKay, 2003; Bishop, 2006; Alpaydin, 2010; Bar-
ber, 2012; Murphy, 2012; Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David, 2014; Rogers
and Girolami, 2016) or programmatic aspects of machine learning (M ¨uller
and Guido, 2016; Raschka and Mirjalili, 2017; Chollet and Allaire, 2018),
we provide only four representative examples of machine learning algo-
rithms. Instead, we focus on the mathematical concepts behind the models
themselves. We hope that readers will be able to gain a deeper understand-
ing of the basic questions in machine learning and connect practical ques-
tions arising from the use of machine learning with fundamental choices
in the mathematical model. We do not aim to write a classical machine learning book. Instead, our
intention is to provide the mathematical background, applied to four cen-
tral machine learning problems, to make it easier to read other machine
learning textbooks. Who Is the Target Audience? As applications of machine learning become widespread in society, we
believe that everybody should have some understanding of its underlying
principles. This book is written in an academic mathematical style, which
enables us to be precise about the concepts behind machine learning. We
encourage readers unfamiliar with this seemingly terse style to persevere
and to keep the goals of each topic in mind. We sprinkle comments and
remarks throughout the text, in the hope that it provides useful guidance
with respect to the big picture. The book assumes the reader to have mathematical knowledge commonly
Draft (2019-10-27) of “Mathematics for Machine Learning”. Feedback: https://mml-book.com . Foreword 3
covered in high school mathematics and physics. For example, the reader
should have seen derivatives and integrals before, and geometric vectors
in two or three dimensions. Starting from there, we generalize these con-
cepts. Therefore, the target audience of the book includes undergraduate
university students, evening learners and learners participating in online
machine learning courses. In analogy to music, there are three types of interaction that people
have with machine learning:
Astute Listener The democratization of machine learning by the pro-
vision of open-source software, online tutorials and cloud-based tools al-
lows users to not worry about the speciﬁcs of pipelines. Users can focus on
extracting insights from data using off-the-shelf tools. This enables non-
tech-savvy domain experts to beneﬁt from machine learning. This is sim-
ilar to listening to music; the user is able to choose and discern between
different types of machine learning, and beneﬁts from it.
More experi-
enced users are like music critics, asking important questions about the
application of machine learning in society such as ethics, fairness, and pri-
vacy of the individual. We hope that this book provides a foundation for
thinking about the certiﬁcation and risk management of machine learning
systems, and allows them to use their domain expertise to build better
machine learning systems. Experienced Artist Skilled practitioners of machine learning can plug
and play different tools and libraries into an analysis pipeline. The stereo-
typical practitioner would be a data scientist or engineer who understands
machine learning interfaces and their use cases, and is able to perform
wonderful feats of prediction from data. This is similar to a virtuoso play-
ing music, where highly skilled practitioners can bring existing instru-
ments to life and bring enjoyment to their audience. Using the mathe-
matics presented here as a primer, practitioners would be able to under-
stand the beneﬁts and limits of their favorite method, and to extend and
generalize existing machine learning algorithms. We hope that this book
provides the impetus for more rigorous and principled development of
machine learning methods. Fledgling Composer As machine learning is applied to new domains,
developers of machine learning need to develop new methods and extend
existing algorithms. They are often researchers who need to understand
the mathematical basis of machine learning and uncover relationships be-
tween different tasks. This is similar to composers of music who, within
the rules and structure of musical theory, create new and amazing pieces. We hope this book provides a high-level overview of other technical books
for people who want to become composers of machine learning. There is
a great need in society for new researchers who are able to propose and
explore novel approaches for attacking the many challenges of learning
from data. c2019 M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, C. S. Ong. To be published by Cambridge University Press. 4 Foreword
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to many people who looked at early drafts of the book and
suffered through painful expositions of concepts. We tried to implement
their ideas that we did not vehemently disagree with. We would like to
especially acknowledge Christfried Webers for his careful reading of many
parts of the book, and his detailed suggestions on structure and presen-
tation. Many friends and colleagues have also been kind enough to pro-
vide their time and energy on different versions of each chapter. We have
been lucky to beneﬁt from the generosity of the online community, who
have suggested improvements via github.com , which greatly improved
the book. The following people have found bugs, proposed clariﬁcations and sug-
gested relevant literature, either via github.com or personal communica-
tion. Their names are sorted alphabetically. Abdul-Ganiy Usman
Adam Gaier
Adele Jackson
Aditya Menon
Alasdair Tran
Aleksandar Krnjaic
Alexander Makrigiorgos
Alfredo Canziani
Ali Shafti
Amr Khalifa
Andrew Tanggara
Angus Gruen
Antal A. Buss
Antoine Toisoul Le Cann
Areg Sarvazyan
Artem Artemev
Artyom Stepanov
Bill Kromydas
Bob Williamson
Boon Ping Lim
Chao Qu
Cheng Li
Chris Sherlock
Christopher Gray
Daniel McNamara
Daniel Wood
Darren Siegel
David Johnston
Dawei ChenEllen Broad
Fengkuangtian Zhu
Fiona Condon
Georgios Theodorou
He Xin
Irene Raissa Kameni
Jakub Nabaglo
James Hensman
Jamie Liu
Jean Kaddour
Jean-Paul Ebejer
Jerry Qiang
Jitesh Sindhare
John Lloyd
Jonas Ngnawe
Jon Martin
Justin Hsi
Kai Arulkumaran
Kamil Dreczkowski
Lily Wang
Lionel Tondji Ngoupeyou
Lydia Kn ¨uﬁng
Mahmoud Aslan
Mark Hartenstein
Mark van der Wilk
Markus Hegland
Martin Hewing
Matthew Alger
Matthew Lee
Draft (2019-10-27) of “Mathematics for Machine Learning”. Feedback: https://mml-book.com .
Foreword 5
Maximus McCann
Mengyan Zhang
Michael Bennett
Michael Pedersen
Minjeong Shin
Mohammad Malekzadeh
Naveen Kumar
Nico Montali
Oscar Armas
Patrick Henriksen
Patrick Wieschollek
Pattarawat Chormai
Paul Kelly
Petros Christodoulou
Piotr Januszewski
Pranav Subramani
Quyu Kong
Ragib Zaman
Rui Zhang
Ryan-Rhys Grifﬁths
Salomon Kabongo
Samuel Ogunmola
Sandeep Mavadia
Sarvesh Nikumbh
Sebastian Raschka
Senanayak Sesh Kumar Karri
Seung-Heon Baek
Shahbaz ChaudharyShakir Mohamed
Shawn Berry
Sheikh Abdul Raheem Ali
Sheng Xue
Sridhar Thiagarajan
Syed Nouman Hasany
Szymon Brych
Thomas B ¨uhler
Timur Sharapov
Tom Melamed
Vincent Adam
Vincent Dutordoir
Vu Minh
Wasim Aftab
Wen Zhi
Wojciech Stokowiec
Xiaonan Chong
Xiaowei Zhang
Yazhou Hao
Yicheng Luo
Young Lee
Yu Lu
Yun Cheng
Yuxiao Huang
Zac Cranko
Zijian Cao
Zoe Nolan
Contributors through github, whose real names were not listed on their
github proﬁle, are:
SamDataMad
bumptiousmonkey
idoamihai
deepakiiminsad
HorizonP
cs-maillist
kudo23empet
victorBigand
17SKYE
jessjing1995
We are also very grateful to Parameswaran Raman and the many anony-
mous reviewers, organized by Cambridge University Press, who read one
or more chapters of earlier versions of the manuscript, and provided con-
structive criticism that led to considerable improvements. A special men-
tion goes to Dinesh Singh Negi, our LATEX support, for detailed and prompt
advice about LATEX-related issues. Last but not least, we are very grateful
to our editor Lauren Cowles, who has been patiently guiding us through
the gestation process of this book. c2019 M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, C. S. Ong. To be published by Cambridge University Press. 6 Foreword
Table of Symbols
Symbol Typical meaning
a;b;c;;; Scalars are lowercase
x;y;z Vectors are bold lowercase
A;B;C Matrices are bold uppercase
x>;A>Transpose of a vector or matrix
A 1Inverse of a matrix
hx;yi Inner product of xandy
x>y Dot product of xandy
B= (b1;b2;b3)(Ordered) tuple
B= [b1;b2;b3]Matrix of column vectors stacked horizontally
B=fb1;b2;b3gSet of vectors (unordered)
Z;N Integers and natural numbers, respectively
R;C Real and complex numbers, respectively
Rnn-dimensional vector space of real numbers
8x Universal quantiﬁer: for all x
9x Existential quantiﬁer: there exists x
a:=b a is deﬁned as b
a=:b b is deﬁned as a
a/b a is proportional to b, i.e.,a=constantb
gf Function composition: “ gafterf”
() If and only if
=) Implies
A;C Sets
a2A ais an element of the set A
; Empty set
D Number of dimensions; indexed by d= 1;:::;D
N Number of data points; indexed by n= 1;:::;N
Im Identity matrix of size mm
0m;n Matrix of zeros of size mn
1m;n Matrix of ones of size mn
ei Standard/canonical vector (where iis the component that is 1)
dim Dimensionality of vector space
rk(A) Rank of matrix A
Im() Image of linear mapping 
ker() Kernel (null space) of a linear mapping 
span[b1] Span (generating set) of b1
tr(A) Trace ofA
det(A) Determinant of A
jj Absolute value or determinant (depending on context)
kk Norm; Euclidean unless speciﬁed
 Eigenvalue or Lagrange multiplier
E Eigenspace corresponding to eigenvalue 
Draft (2019-10-27) of “Mathematics for Machine Learning”. Feedback: https://mml-book.com . Foreword 7
Symbol Typical meaning
 Parameter vector
@f
@xPartial derivative of fwith respect to x
df
dxTotal derivative of fwith respect to x
r Gradient
L Lagrangian
L Negative log-likelihood n
k
Binomial coefﬁcient, nchoosek
VX[x] Variance ofxwith respect to the random variable X
EX[x] Expectation of xwith respect to the random variable X
CovX;Y[x;y]Covariance between xandy. X? ?YjZ X is conditionally independent of YgivenZ
Xp Random variable Xis distributed according to p
N ;
Gaussian distribution with mean and covariance 
Ber() Bernoulli distribution with parameter 
Bin(N;) Binomial distribution with parameters N;
Beta(;) Beta distribution with parameters ;
Table of Abbreviations and Acronyms
Acronym Meaning
e.g.
Exempli gratia (Latin: for example)
GMM Gaussian mixture model
i.e. Id est (Latin: this means)
i.i.d. Independent, identically distributed
MAP Maximum a posteriori
MLE Maximum likelihood estimation/estimator
ONB Orthonormal basis
PCA Principal component analysis
PPCA Probabilistic principal component analysis
REF Row-echelon form
SPD Symmetric, positive deﬁnite
SVM Support vector machine
c2019 M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, C. S. Ong. To be published by Cambridge University Press. Part I
Mathematical Foundations
This material will be published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learn-
ingby Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong. This pre-publication version is
free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale or use in deriva-
tive works. cby M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2019. https://mml-book.com . 1
Introduction and Motivation
Machine learning is about designing algorithms that automatically extract
valuable information from data. The emphasis here is on “automatic”, i.e.,
machine learning is concerned about general-purpose methodologies that
can be applied to many datasets, while producing something that is mean-
ingful. There are three concepts that are at the core of machine learning:
data, a model, and learning. Since machine learning is inherently data driven, data is at the core data
of machine learning. The goal of machine learning is to design general-
purpose methodologies to extract valuable patterns from data, ideally
without much domain-speciﬁc expertise. For example, given a large corpus
of documents (e.g., books in many libraries), machine learning methods
can be used to automatically ﬁnd relevant topics that are shared across
documents (Hoffman et al., 2010). To achieve this goal, we design mod-
elsthat are typically related to the process that generates data, similar to model
the dataset we are given. For example, in a regression setting, the model
would describe a function that maps inputs to real-valued outputs. To
paraphrase Mitchell (1997): A model is said to learn from data if its per-
formance on a given task improves after the data is taken into account. The goal is to ﬁnd good models that generalize well to yet unseen data,
which we may care about in the future. Learning can be understood as a learning
way to automatically ﬁnd patterns and structure in data by optimizing the
parameters of the model. While machine learning has seen many success stories, and software is
readily available to design and train rich and ﬂexible machine learning
systems, we believe that the mathematical foundations of machine learn-
ing are important in order to understand fundamental principles upon
which more complicated machine learning systems are built. Understand-
ing these principles can facilitate creating new machine learning solutions,
understanding and debugging existing approaches, and learning about the
inherent assumptions and limitations of the methodologies we are work-
ing with. 11
This material will be published by Cambridge University Press as Mathematics for Machine Learn-
ingby Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong. This pre-publication version is
free to view and download for personal use only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale or use in deriva-
tive works. cby M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, and C. S. Ong, 2019. https://mml-book.com . 12 Introduction and Motivation
1.1 Finding Words for Intuitions
A challenge we face regularly in machine learning is that concepts and
words are slippery, and a particular component of the machine learning
system can be abstracted to different mathematical concepts. For example,
the word “algorithm” is used in at least two different senses in the con-
text of machine learning. In the ﬁrst sense, we use the phrase “machine
learning algorithm” to mean a system that makes predictions based on in-
put data. We refer to these algorithms as predictors .
In the second sense, predictor
we use the exact same phrase “machine learning algorithm” to mean a
system that adapts some internal parameters of the predictor so that it
performs well on future unseen input data. Here we refer to this adapta-
tion as training a system. training
This book will not resolve the issue of ambiguity, but we want to high-
light upfront that, depending on the context, the same expressions can
mean different things. However, we attempt to make the context sufﬁ-
ciently clear to reduce the level of ambiguity. The ﬁrst part of this book introduces the mathematical concepts and
foundations needed to talk about the three main components of a machine
learning system: data, models, and learning. We will brieﬂy outline these
components here, and we will revisit them again in Chapter 8 once we
have discussed the necessary mathematical concepts. While not all data is numerical, it is often useful to consider data in
a number format. In this book, we assume that data has already been
appropriately converted into a numerical representation suitable for read-
ing into a computer program. Therefore, we think of data as vectors. As data as vectors
another illustration of how subtle words are, there are (at least) three
different ways to think about vectors: a vector as an array of numbers (a
computer science view), a vector as an arrow with a direction and magni-
tude (a physics view), and a vector as an object that obeys addition and
scaling (a mathematical view). Amodel is typically used to describe a process for generating data, sim- model
ilar to the dataset at hand. Therefore, good models can also be thought
of as simpliﬁed versions of the real (unknown) data-generating process,
capturing aspects that are relevant for modeling the data and extracting
hidden patterns from it. A good model can then be used to predict what
would happen in the real world without performing real-world experi-
ments. We now come to the crux of the matter, the learning component of learning
machine learning. Assume we are given a dataset and a suitable model. Training the model means to use the data available to optimize some pa-
rameters of the model with respect to a utility function that evaluates how
well the model predicts the training data. Most training methods can be
thought of as an approach analogous to climbing a hill to reach its peak. In this analogy, the peak of the hill corresponds to a maximum of some
Draft (2019-10-27) of “Mathematics for Machine Learning”. Feedback: https://mml-book.com . 1.2 Two Ways to Read This Book 13
desired performance measure. However, in practice, we are interested in
the model to perform well on unseen data. Performing well on data that
we have already seen (training data) may only mean that we found a
good way to memorize the data. However, this may not generalize well to
unseen data, and, in practical applications, we often need to expose our
machine learning system to situations that it has not encountered before. Let us summarize the main concepts of machine learning that we cover
in this book:
We represent data as vectors. We choose an appropriate model, either using the probabilistic or opti-
mization view. We learn from available data by using numerical optimization methods
with the aim that the model performs well on data not used for training. 1.2 Two Ways to Read This Book
We can consider two strategies for understanding the mathematics for
machine learning:
Bottom-up: Building up the concepts from foundational to more ad-
vanced. This is often the preferred approach in more technical ﬁelds,
such as mathematics. This strategy has the advantage that the reader
at all times is able to rely on their previously learned concepts. Unfor-
tunately, for a practitioner many of the foundational concepts are not
particularly interesting by themselves, and the lack of motivation means
that most foundational deﬁnitions are quickly forgotten.
Top-down: Drilling down from practical needs to more basic require-
ments. This goal-driven approach has the advantage that the readers
know at all times why they need to work on a particular concept, and
there is a clear path of required knowledge. The downside of this strat-
egy is that the knowledge is built on potentially shaky foundations, and
the readers have to remember a set of words that they do not have any
way of understanding. We decided to write this book in a modular way to separate foundational
(mathematical) concepts from applications so that this book can be read
in both ways. The book is split into two parts, where Part I lays the math-
ematical foundations and Part II applies the concepts from Part I to a set
of fundamental machine learning problems, which form four pillars of
machine learning as illustrated in Figure 1.1: regression, dimensionality
reduction, density estimation, and classiﬁcation. Chapters in Part I mostly
build upon the previous ones, but it is possible to skip a chapter and work
backward if necessary. Chapters in Part II are only loosely coupled and
can be read in any order. There are many pointers forward and backward
c2019 M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, C. S. Ong. To be published by Cambridge University Press. 14 Introduction and Motivation
Figure 1.1 The
foundations and
four pillars of
machine learning. Classiﬁcation
Density
Estimation
Regression
Dimensionality
Reduction
Machine Learning
Vector Calculus Probability & Distributions Optimization
Analytic Geometry Matrix Decomposition Linear Algebra
between the two parts of the book to link mathematical concepts with
machine learning algorithms. Of course there are more than two ways to read this book. Most readers
learn using a combination of top-down and bottom-up approaches, some-
times building up basic mathematical skills before attempting more com-
plex concepts, but also choosing topics based on applications of machine
learning. Part I Is about Mathematics
The four pillars of machine learning we cover in this book (see Figure 1.1)
require a solid mathematical foundation, which is laid out in Part I. We represent numerical data as vectors and represent a table of such
data as a matrix. The study of vectors and matrices is called linear algebra ,
which we introduce in Chapter 2. The collection of vectors as a matrix is linear algebra
also described there. Given two vectors representing two objects in the real world, we want
to make statements about their similarity. The idea is that vectors that
are similar should be predicted to have similar outputs by our machine
learning algorithm (our predictor). To formalize the idea of similarity be-
tween vectors, we need to introduce operations that take two vectors as
input and return a numerical value representing their similarity. The con-
struction of similarity and distances is central to analytic geometry and is analytic geometry
discussed in Chapter 3. In Chapter 4, we introduce some fundamental concepts about matri-
ces and matrix decomposition . Some operations on matrices are extremely matrix
decomposition useful in machine learning, and they allow for an intuitive interpretation
of the data and more efﬁcient learning. We often consider data to be noisy observations of some true underly-
ing signal. We hope that by applying machine learning we can identify the
signal from the noise. This requires us to have a language for quantify-
ing what “noise” means. We often would also like to have predictors that
Draft (2019-10-27) of “Mathematics for Machine Learning”. Feedback: https://mml-book.com . 1.2 Two Ways to Read This Book 15
allow us to express some sort of uncertainty, e.g., to quantify the conﬁ-
dence we have about the value of the prediction at a particular test data
point. Quantiﬁcation of uncertainty is the realm of probability theory and probability theory
is covered in Chapter 6.
To train machine learning models, we typically ﬁnd parameters that
maximize some performance measure. Many optimization techniques re-
quire the concept of a gradient, which tells us the direction in which to
search for a solution. Chapter 5 is about vector calculus and details the vector calculus
concept of gradients, which we subsequently use in Chapter 7, where we
talk about optimization to ﬁnd maxima/minima of functions. optimization
Part II Is about Machine Learning
The second part of the book introduces four pillars of machine learning
as shown in Figure 1.1. We illustrate how the mathematical concepts in-
troduced in the ﬁrst part of the book are the foundation for each pillar. Broadly speaking, chapters are ordered by difﬁculty (in ascending order). In Chapter 8, we restate the three components of machine learning
(data, models, and parameter estimation) in a mathematical fashion. In
addition, we provide some guidelines for building experimental set-ups
that guard against overly optimistic evaluations of machine learning sys-
tems. Recall that the goal is to build a predictor that performs well on
unseen data. In Chapter 9, we will have a close look at linear regression , where our linear regression
objective is to ﬁnd functions that map inputs x2RDto corresponding ob-
served function values y2R, which we can interpret as the labels of their
respective inputs. We will discuss classical model ﬁtting (parameter esti-
mation) via maximum likelihood and maximum a posteriori estimation,
as well as Bayesian linear regression, where we integrate the parameters
out instead of optimizing them. Chapter 10 focuses on dimensionality reduction , the second pillar in Fig- dimensionality
reduction ure 1.1, using principal component analysis. The key objective of dimen-
sionality reduction is to ﬁnd a compact, lower-dimensional representation
of high-dimensional data x2RD, which is often easier to analyze than
the original data. Unlike regression, dimensionality reduction is only con-
cerned about modeling the data – there are no labels associated with a
data pointx. In Chapter 11, we will move to our third pillar: density estimation . The density estimation
objective of density estimation is to ﬁnd a probability distribution that de-
scribes a given dataset. We will focus on Gaussian mixture models for this
purpose, and we will discuss an iterative scheme to ﬁnd the parameters of
this model. As in dimensionality reduction, there are no labels associated
with the data points x2RD. However, we do not seek a low-dimensional
representation of the data. Instead, we are interested in a density model
that describes the data. Chapter 12 concludes the book with an in-depth discussion of the fourth
c2019 M. P. Deisenroth, A. A. Faisal, C. S. Ong. To be published by Cambridge University Press. 16 Introduction and Motivation
pillar: classiﬁcation . We will discuss classiﬁcation in the context of support classiﬁcation
vector machines. Similar to regression (Chapter 9), we have inputs xand
corresponding labels y. However, unlike regression, where the labels were
real-valued, the labels in classiﬁcation are integers, which requires special
care. 1.3 Exercises and Feedback
We provide some exercises in Part I, which can be done mostly by pen and
paper. For Part II, we provide programming tutorials (jupyter notebooks)
to explore some properties of the machine learning algorithms we discuss
in this book. We appreciate that Cambridge University Press strongly supports our
aim to democratize education and learning by making this book freely
available for download at
https://mml-book.com
where tutorials, errata, and additional materials can be found. Mistakes
can be reported and feedback provided using the preceding URL. Draft (2019-10-27) of “Mathematics for Machine Learning”. Feedback: https://mml-book.com .
Linear Algebra
When formalizing intuitive concepts, a common approach is to construct a
set of objects (symbols) and a set of rules to manipulate these objects. This
is known as an algebra . Linear algebra is the study of vectors and certain algebra
rules to manipulate vectors. The vectors many of us know from school are
called “geometric vectors”, which are usually denoted by a small arrow
above the letter, e.g.,  !xand  !y. In this book, we discuss more general
concepts of vectors and use a bold letter to represent them, e.g., xandy. In general, vectors are special objects that can be added together and
multiplied by scalars to produce another object of the same kind. From
an abstract mathematical viewpoint, any object that satisﬁes these two
properties can be considered a vector. Here are some examples of such
vector objects: